Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Case Study: Melbourne Housing Data Analysis Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Problem Definition Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Understand the data - the rows and columns, what they mean and how they are related Data Understanding Understand the business context and the objectives of solving the problem Problem Statement Summarize and present the insights for storytelling Insights & Presentation Perform Univariate, Bivariate and Correlation Analysis to find patterns and generate insights from the data Exploratory Data Analysis Clean and manipulate the data, and prepare the data for analysis Data Preparation 1 2 3 4 5 DATA INSIGHTS Learning Journey Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Problem Definition ? Housing is one of the most fundamental human needs. Demand for housing has grown rapidly over the years as the standard of living has improved, which has led to housing markets having a positive impact on many nations’ economies ? Real Broker is a startup that enables customers to purchase or lease real estate, including houses, apartments, and land. The company employs professional auditors who measure and map all the necessary elements for the properties as well as important geographic data. ? The Melbourne Housing dataset contains different attributes of various houses in Melbourne, Australia, such as their location, price, property details and other characteristics. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Problem Definition ? The business makes an effort to comprehend the market and current trends, as well as property values and the neighbourhood, before presenting its consumers with services. ? As a Data Analyst in the Analytics & AI department at Real Broker, your objective is to explore the dataset collected in order to extract insights on the key factors that affect the selling price and other characteristics of houses in Melbourne, Australia. This analysis would be of great value to Real Broker in formulating custom strategies for segmented groups of clientele across various front-office operations in the organization. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Data Definition Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Name of the suburban region Data Definition Suburb Rooms Number of rooms in the house Type This is the type of the house, like house, cottage, villa, townhouse, etc. SellerG Name of the real estate agent who sold the property Date Date at which the property is sold Distance Distance of the property from Central Business District (CBD) in KMs Postcode Postal code of the area Postcode Number of properties that are present in the suburb Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Regionname Building area in square metres Number of bedrooms in the house Data Definition Bedroom Bathroom Number of bathrooms in the house Car Number of car parking spaces in the property LandSize Land size in square metres BuildingArea YearBuilt Year in which the house was built Name of the region in which the property is located Price Selling Price of the house in Australian Dollars (AUD) Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. EDA: Data at Hand ? 27114 Rows: Each row in the dataset represents information about a house in Melbourne. ? 16 Columns: The columns / attributes in the dataset contain structural and geographical details, real estate agent, selling date, year built, and price of the house. ? In the BuildingArea column, there are entities such as ‘missing’ and ‘inf’, which can be considered missing values. We can convert the data type of the column to float. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? The maximum value of BuildingArea is significantly greater than the average. That means the higher values of this column may be outliers. ? The house that is furthest away from Melbourne's central business district is nearly 48 kilometers away, but the average distance is 11 kilometers, meaning most houses in this dataset are somewhat close by. With a minimum distance of 0, there are some houses in the central region. ? The majority of the houses in this dataset are of type h (house, cottage, etc). EDA: Summary Statistics Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? Similar to BuildingArea, Landsize may also contain some outliers. ? The data contains houses that are over 150 years old (YearBuilt having a minimum value of 1850) and as newly built as the year 2019. ? As expected, the Price variable has a wide range with an average price of 1.05 million AUD. ? It is apparent that some of the columns in this dataset (Building Area, Year Built and Land Size) have a high proportion of missing values. EDA: Summary Statistics Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Univariate Analysis Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Price - Frequency Distribution ? The majority (over 77%) of houses have prices in the range of 0.5 to 2 million AUD. ? As can be expected, each bucket after 1 million AUD has a smaller number of houses in comparison to the previous one. There are very few houses that cost over 3 million AUD. 12073 6026 2856 3748 1202 77.29% Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Distance - Frequency Distribution ? The distribution of the Distance variable, as we see, is also right skewed. ? Many of the houses in this dataset (nearly 63 %) appear to be at a distance of 5 to 15 km from the central business district of Melbourne. There are very few houses that are over 30 kms away. 3764 8477 8579 3398 1505 661 62.9% Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Region Name - Bar Chart ? The vast majority of houses in this dataset (over 98%) are in the Metropolitan areas, with the Southern, Northern and Western Metropolitan regions dominating. ? The Eastern, Northern, and Western Victoria regions have very few houses. 8484 7812 3264 1337 167 165 94 5795 98.44% Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Number of Bedrooms & Building Area - Freq Distributions ? Bedroom and Building Area, as we have seen, are two columns with missing values, with Building Area in particular having a missing value percentage of over 61%. ? Both these columns are also seen to be quite right-skewed. ? Over 45% of the houses in the dataset have 3 bedrooms, while nearly 99% of houses are smaller than 500 sq metres in building area (discounting those rows with missing values). 45.27% 98.99% Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? The majority (over 77%) of houses have prices in the range of 0.5 to 2 million AUD. ? Each bucket after 1 million AUD has a smaller number of houses in comparison to the previous one. There are very few houses that cost over 3 million AUD. ? Many of the houses in this dataset (nearly 63 %) appear to be at a distance of 5 to 15 km from the central business district of Melbourne. There are very few houses that are over 30 kms away. ? The vast majority of houses in this dataset (over 98%) are in the Metropolitan areas, with the Southern, Northern and Western Metropolitan regions dominating. ? There are columns with missing values with Building Area in particular having a missing value percentage of over 61%. ? Over 45% of the houses in the dataset have 3 bedrooms, while nearly 99% of houses are smaller than 500 sq metres in building area (discounting those rows with missing values). Summary of the Univariate Analysis Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Bivariate Analysis Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? The Correlation Matrix is a structure used for bivariate analysis that highlights every possible pairwise correlation between the features of the dataset, usually in a heatmap-style coloring scheme. ? In this correlation matrix, Price shows a high positive correlation with features relating to the number of rooms, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms and number of car parking spaces. That is as expected, because from our understanding of housing prices, the more the number of rooms, bedrooms, parking spaces etc. the higher the selling price of the property. Correlation Matrix Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? Price also shows a negative correlation with the Distance column. This is an interesting insight and a likely indicator that housing development in the city of Melbourne has happened in a radially-outward manner - the economic CBD (Central Business District) hub in the center of Melbourne likely has the highest demand and prices for housing, and as the distance of the property from this city center increases, the selling price of the property will decrease. ? The number of rooms, bedrooms, and bathrooms also show high correlations with each other as expected - in houses, it is common to see these quantities increase or decrease in sync. Correlation Matrix Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Price vs Distance - Scatter Plot ? We can also double-click into some of the introductory insights gained from the correlation matrix through actual pairwise bivariate plots - one such example would be a Scatter Plot between Distance and Price. ? As we suspected, with increasing distance from the Melbourne CBD, the house price appears to decrease. The reduced house prices are especially apparent after we go 15-20 km away from the heart of the city. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Price vs Number of Bedrooms - Bar Chart ? Although our earlier observation about the positive correlation between price and the number of bedrooms is reflected in the Bar Chart between them, it comes with a caveat. ? It is interesting to note that, contrary to expectations, the average price of houses starts decreasing when we go beyond 5-6 bedrooms, to 7,8 or 9 bedrooms. ? This could be because these houses with a high number of bedrooms may actually be much further away from the Melbourne CBD, and that’s what’s decreasing their price. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Price vs Year Built - Bar Chart ? Interestingly, Price also has a negative correlation with the Year in which the house was built. This is evident in the Bar Chart created for this bivariate analysis. ? A decreasing trend such as this could potentially indicate that the older properties might be vintage houses which have higher selling prices. And conversely, a lot of cheaper accommodation has been developed in more recent years to house the influx of people, as Melbourne is also an attractive international destination for immigrants. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? Moving beyond Price, Distance is another feature that shows interesting bivariate relations with some of the other attributes. One of these is the bivariate Bar Chart of Distance vs Year Built ? It is apparent from the chart that until about 1981, the distance increased in correlation with the year in which the house was built. This was presumably because housing development till then purely took place based on where land was available, and with the center of the city likely being saturated by then, the housing was only happening radially outward. Distance vs Year Built - Bar Chart Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? However, since 1981, the growing popularity of Melbourne for housing might have meant that property developers started focusing on the center of the city and the Melbourne CBD, and trying to use every possible space there for houses, as that’s where the demand has grown and the houses are likely to sell. That might explain the somewhat negative correlation between distance and year built from 1981 to about 2002, and since then the correlation looks weak. Distance vs Year Built - Bar Chart Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Average Number of Rooms vs Distance - Line Chart ? In light of the previous insights, it would make sense that there’s a positive correlation between distance from the city center and the average number of rooms in the housing property. ? It is likely that larger homes are more readily available as one moves away from the congested CBD and into the suburban areas and outskirts of the city of Melbourne. Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. ? One of the major insights from this exercise has been the relative importance of distance and price, as two of the features that show correlations with the other attributes of housing properties. ? The price of a house is determined by many characteristics, that make sense both from the global property housing market as well as the nature of housing developments in urban centers like Melbourne. ? In this dataset, the price of a house increases with an increased number of rooms, bedrooms and parking spaces, but also decreases with increasing recency in terms of the year in which it was built. In addition, the price also decreases with increasing distance from the city center, as the Melbourne CBD (Central Business District) is the city’s economic hub and has the highest demand for property. ? The distance of a house from the city center is also interestingly correlated with the year in which it was built, and the patterns of that correlation might reflect the nature in which housing development may have historically happened in the Melbourne urban area. Insights and Conclusions Proprietary content. © Great Learning. All Rights Reserved. Unauthorized use or distribution prohibited. Insights and Conclusions ? As a Data Analyst, generating valuable insights from the data in this manner is the first step towards data-driven decision making using AI. ? This exercise should give you an introductory idea on how to use No Code AI tools such as RapidMiner to perform Exploratory Data Analysis and come up with the first level of insights, which often points us in important directions when moving forward into Machine Learning and AI techniques.